# The Value of Rebel Alliances

I begin with the assumption that rebels genuinely care about political outcomes. This contrasts with the most extreme interpretations of the greed-based theory of civil war [e.g. @mueller00], which view rebellion as little more than large-scale criminal activity. I do not, however, view this assumption as incompatible with the notion that private material benefits play an important role in recruiting and retaining rank-and-file members, or even with the evidence that many rebel elites have accumulated great personal wealth by capturing natural resources and other revenue streams. I simply expect that rebel groups have political preferences of some variety, and that these preferences will play an important role in shaping their relations with other groups. For example, rebels may have ideological goals that could be classified on a standard left-right spectrum, advocate for increased political status for an ethnic or religious groups, or pursue secession for a particular region.

Frequently, rebel groups engage in military collaboration with other non-state actors. This can range from an agreement not to target each other, to a distribution of territory, to joint campaigns on the battlefield, to formal alliances. If political interests are a primary motive for rebels, then all else equal, they should have an incentive to cooperate with groups that share similar goals. Cooperation should be mutually-beneficial to like-minded rebel groups for several reasons. First and most obviously, alliances aggregate capabilities. This is perhaps the most common conception of alliances in international politics [see @Bennett1997]. Yet, in the context of civil wars this process takes a somewhat different form. Whereas international alliances aggregate capabilities by bringing states into a conflict they might not otherwise participate in, rebel groups by definition are already participating in conflict. Nevertheless, these alliances can bring great value because rather than simply aggregating, they can concentrate capabilities in space and time. For example, two rebel groups might be unable to capture a government-held town on their own, but in a joint operation would be sufficiently powerful to do so.

Second, alliances can allow for burden-sharing. This dynamic has been offered as an explanation for international alliances such as NATO [@Sandler1980], though it may not occur under all circumstances [see @Olson1966]. Alliances can ensure that a single rebel group is not responsible for defeating the government, and might serve as a mechanism for reigning in the temptation to free ride off of another group's efforts. Relatedly, alliances can facilitate specialization by rebel groups. For example, one alliance partner might specialize in holding territory, while another specializes in launching offensives in new areas.

Third, alliances can manage conflict between members and ensure that their resources are directed toward common enemies. @Weitsman1997 argues that alliances often serve to tether powerful states to one another, so as to reduce the probability of conflict between them. @Gibler1996 finds that alliance treaties are often used to settle territorial disputes between the signatories. Similar alliances can be seen in civil wars, as rebels amongst themselves. In this case alliances allow the rebels to coordinate on a distribution of territory and avoid conflict. Compliance with such agreements is incentivized by the fact that reneging on the territorial arrangement would likely result in the loss of the other benefits of the alliance, such as capability aggregation.

Fourth, operating as an alliance bloc may be beneficial to the groups involved in bargaining situations. An alliance bloc with a set of coordinated demands might command greater bargaining leverage than individual members, who collectively have similar power, but a more disparate set of demands. Perhaps more crucially, alliances might mitigate credible commitment problems. Peaceful settlements to conflicts can be derailed by concerns that the other side will not adhere to the agreement [@fearon95]. In civil wars, this is often borne out by extreme "spoiler" factions. A rebel commitment to a peace agreement is more likely to be viewed as credible if it has formal control over other factions.

# The Choice of Alliance Partners

While cooperation in the form of alliances can be beneficial to rebel groups with shared interests for the reasons outlined above, it is necessary to develop more precise expectations regarding when these shared interests will exist. In theory rebels at a minimum share a common interest in defeating the government. Yet, even that is not always the case, as rebel factions have defected to the government side in a number of conflicts including those in Sri Lanka and Iraq [@Christia2012; @Staniland2012d]. Thus, the formation of alliances seems to require a more specific set of shared interests. Broadly, I expect rebels to cooperate when their primary objectives entail the provision of public, non-rival goods to society, and to be much less likely to form alliances when they are pursuing goals that are subject to rival consumption.

Most ideological interests should fall into the category of public, non-rival goods. If two groups each prefer a similar goal, such as a redistributive welfare system, a greater role for Islam in government, or greater regional autonomy, they will be able to enjoy the benefits of such policies regardless of which group enacts them. All else equal, goals of this sort should create common interests among the rebels who share them. Yet in many cases, shared overarching goals are undercut by conflicts over other interests. For example, even the successful implementation of a shared policy goal does not exclusively create non-rival benefits. While all rebels who share the goal will benefit from a revolution that leads to its implementation, government power is a finite resource that is likely to be concentrated in the hands of a relatively small groups of elites @Christia2012. However, this potential conflict is unlikely to become relevant until late in conflicts, and even then only if a group believes it could succeed in overthrowing the government on its own. In most other cases, rebels should have relatively short time horizons, and prefer to maximize their chances of success on the battlefield in the short run. Thus in most cases, rebel groups that share inclusive policy goals (i.e. those that benefit most or all members of society) should be likely to form alliances.

*H1: Rebel groups with similar inclusive policy goals should be more likely to form alliances than other rebel dyads*

*H2: More powerful rebel groups will be less likely to form alliances than weaker ones*

While groups with similar policy interests should tend not to come into competition until late in conflicts, for groups representing identity-based interests, the effect is contingent on the size of the group and malleability of group boundaries. The reason for this lies in the fact that many rebel groups rely on civilian populations for material support [@Weinstein2007], and the types of goals a group pursues is an important determinant of the malleability of civilian support coalitions. A group with broad-based policy goals might be able to persuade or coerce almost any group of citizens to support it. Thus, until a very large portion of the civilian population has been captured, groups sharing these types of goals will not be in competition over support as they can simply carve out different coalitions. Similar dynamics should occur among groups pursuing the interests of large or social groups, such as the majority ethnic or religious group. For example two Syrian rebel groups seeking to replace the Alawite-dominated Assad regime with one that embraces Sunni doctrine should find that civilian support is not particularly scarce given that Syria is majority-Sunni. Similarly, groups advocating the interests of social groups with fluid boundaries should tend to have opportunities to capture new civilian support rather than competing with similar groups over existing support. For instance, for a group advocating a Salafi-Jihadi ideology, any Sunni Muslim might serve as a potential convert.

Rebels representing minority social groups, however, should tend to come into conflict more quickly. Groups of this sort must draw their support from a social base that is both smaller and more likely to be tapped out than the bases of more broadly defined groups, and that is more rigidly bounded. A rebel group aimed at advancing the interests of a particular ethnic or religious group is unlikely to attract support from non-group members. Even if it was able to do so, this might its standing with co-ethnics/co-religionists, as rival groups could claim that it is watering down its agenda. In other words, socially-defined rebel groups seeking to expand the pool of potential support might be vulnerable to outbidding appeals. In short, I expect that groups with the agenda of advancing the interests of majority ethnic or religious groups will be  likely to cooperate with groups holding similar interests. Groups representing social minorities, however, should be unlikely to cooperate.^[In the present analysis, however, the Kurds are the only group to whom this logic is likely to apply, and thus I do not test this hypothesis as it would essentially be a dummy variable for the one Kurdish-Kurdish dyad.]

*H3: Rebel groups representing the same majority ethnic or religious groups will be more likely to form alliances than other dyads*

Groups seeking to control the same territory should face a similar problem of rival consumption. Because secessionist claims tend to have well-defined geographic and/or ethnic boundaries, rebel groups representing such claims are likely to be in competition over a fixed pool of support. Thus, I expect that groups making similar territorial claims will be unlikely to cooperate.

*H4: Rebel groups with overlapping territorial claims will be less likely to form alliances than other dyads*
