## Relations Among Rebels

Relations among rebel groups remains one of the most underexplored aspects of civil war. The vast majority of existing studies explore conflict between non-state actors. In the most comprehensive study to date, [@Fjelde2012] suggest that rebels fight each other for control over resources such drug supplies or valuable terrain. Greater resource endowments should lead to better postwar bargains with the government in the long run, and greater ability to sustain a rebellion in the short run. The authors find that this logic is most likely to prevail in the presence of natural resources, territories that are not controlled by the government, militarily weak governments, and significant power asymmetries among rebels. [@Atlas1999] find that this dynamic can also arise in the aftermath of conflicts, as the main fighting in renewed civil wars is often between previously allied rebel groups.

Several works examine the emergence of conflict within previously coherent movements. [@Bakke2012a] conceptualize the fragmentation of rebels movements as varying in terms of the raw number of organizations, the degree of institutionalization unifying the organizations, and the distribution of power among them. They expect a greater general likelihood of infighting in more fragmented movements, particularly those with large numbers of groups and low degrees of institutionalization. [@Asal2012] find that ethnopolitical movements with factionalized leadership structures are most likely to experience splits. Similarly, [@Cunningham2012a] find that infighting is most likely in self-determination movements with large numbers of factions, and that the emergence of new factions is especially likely to trigger violence. [@Christia2012] also sees pre-existing social structure as a contributing factor to infighting, finding that rebel groups and coalitions tend to fragment when battlefield losses exacerbate divisions between faction leaders. [@McLauchlin2012] find that repression can deepen rifts within movements that are already divided, but cohesive movements may become further solidified by repression.

There is also a substantial literature on intraethnic violence. @Lilja2011 find that that Tamil rebels used violence against coethnic civilians to control populations and the resources they hold, and against coethnic armed groups to establish dominance within the ethnic group. @Staniland2012d finds that these patterns intraethnic violence tend to be self-reinforcing, as violence within ethnic insurgencies is the primary cause of the defection of some subsets of ethnic groups to the opposing side in the conflict. [@Warren2015] seek to explain which ethnic groups are likely to experience such fragmentation, finding a curvilinear relationship between the size of an ethnic group and its probably of experiencing infighting. Small ethnic groups have the ability to police themselves, limiting violence, and intraethnic violence in large groups is likely to be met with government intervention. Thus, only moderate-sized groups tend to experience internal violence.

One of the very few studies to examine alliances in civil war is @Christia2012. She argues that neorealist balancing theory from international relations explains alignments in civil wars. When one coalition - a group of rebels or government-aligned forces - becomes too powerful, other groups will band together to prevent their own destruction. This mechanism is constrained, however, by a desire to maximize one's share of the post-war spoils. Thus, rebels realign frequently, seeking to form minimum winning coalitions. While shared identity appears on the surface to be an important determinant of rebel alignments, Christia views these narratives as post-hoc justifications aimed at legitimizing decisions that are really driven mostly by power. While @Christia2012 supports her theory with excellent fieldwork and quantitative evidence, it does not fully address important aspects of alliance formation. Namely, while balancing can potentially account for why rebel groups form alliances, and when they will alter their ties, it does not explain why groups choose a particular partner when multiple options are available, though Christia suggests that these decisions are shaped by personal relationships between rebel elites. Furthermore, in the international realm balancing has often failed to occur when realist theory would predict it [@Schroeder1994]. Thus, it is important to determine whether Christia's theory applies beyond her two cases of Afghanistan and Bosnia, and whether other factors might be at work.
